people feel like they can't speak their
minds the Millennials are just saddled
in debt we have a system in which H or a
third of American colleges produce
graduating classes in which the median
graduate makes less than the average
high school graduate like who can blame
young
[Music]
people hello everyone watching and
listening today I'm speaking with Greg
lucoff and Ricky Schlott co-authors of
the new book The counselling of the
American mind we discussed the Inception
and inspiration of this new book which
seeks to assess Council culture as it's
harshly affecting American universities
and other institutions we break down the
difference between feminine and
masculine tendencies in regards to free
speech the entirely real and yet rarely
discussed phenomenon of toxic femininity
and why we must prioritize a cultural
shift away from the ease of
self-described
victimhood so you have a new book coming
out on October 17th uh this is recorded
in
2023 October 17th cancelling of the
American mind authors Greg lukinov and
Ricky schlot so congratulations on that
um thank you so much
why don't you start by telling us a
little bit about the book and how why
you guys are partnering together also to
write it yeah well it I mean I think
it's probably a little unusual for a
48-year-old and a 23y old to be writing
together but I feel I couldn't feel
luckier then to get to get to work with
Ricky Schlott she's absolutely brilliant
and it was something that we knew right
away when we saw her writing when she
was 19 and 20 that there was something
very special about this young woman so
originally Ricky reached out to us
because she read our my book with
Jonathan height coddling of the American
mind um and said this is exactly right
this is this is exactly what I'm seeing
in my own environment that the threats
to free speech are also devastating to
mental health um and she actually
dropped out of NYU in 2020 um also
during coid which I think is exactly the
right move you know once you're on
lockdown drop out um the the defeats of
major point of college and originally
what we were planning to do uh was write
a book or what I was considering doing
was writing a book that was a follow-up
to codling um even though cancelling is
a follow-up in a sense something that
was much more directly a follow-up
because it it's me you know the book was
written by me and Jonathan height like
two 48 and 60-year old genen aers but a
lot of it's concerned about the terrible
uh Injustice we du to young women uh
teaching them the mental habits of
anxious and depressed people so she
wrote me and height to talk about um if
we thought maybe co could unod uh young
people by presenting challenges that
they could then overcome it's a little
optimistic yeah probably a little a
little overly optimistic uh but I was
excited about the premise and uh
immediately realizing just how brilliant
she was from her writing uh she became a
fire fellow and we talked about the idea
of working together um on something that
would be a follow-up to to talk about
from a a gen Z young woman's perspective
um but as we were getting ready for that
I started realizing that there are still
people out there who are trying to claim
that canc culture isn't real and I'm
like okay I'm sorry like fire is sitting
on a mountain of data something
absolutely catastrophic has happened on
canus in the last 10 years this is easy
to establish so we decided to do a book
that that focuses on three things one
prove it's not just real it's historic
um we we don't see the kind of numbers
of professors fired uh in the last you
know since we we Mark cancel cultures
beginning around 2014 we don't see the
kind of numbers of professors fired
during cancel culture culture since the
1950s uh in the United States there's
nothing even close about twice as many
professors fired than the standard
estimates of mcarthism for example so
people saying it doesn't exist is just
crazy then then we try to situate it as
a as part of a a a way of winning
arguments without winning arguments that
essentially it succeeds so well because
people realize I could well I could try
to refute you an argument and I might
fail but I could also scare you into
thinking that you don't have a
livelihood going forward to just make it
make the cost so high of dissenting that
you win arguments without persuading
anybody and then the last part of it is
really trying to point to differ
potential
Solutions yeah and I would also add that
the difference of our perspective
together is is really rich because I'm
I'm Generation Z we're we're decades
apart we have very different political
beliefs but everything in this book in
terms of Classical liberalism and and
free speech and pluralism and
reinvigorating our democ Ry and our our
Civic conversation is just like we hold
that so near and dear into our hearts
and I think that that cross-generational
um kind of melding really worked very
well to our advantage in the book
absolutely and Ricky also made me more
of a cat person no well that's always I
seem to get cats in the scheme of in the
in the time that we did the book
together yeah good good well you're Al
always supposed to pet a cat when you
meet one on the street you know so I
remember that from your book and iice
that's exactly right so you now you guys
said a bunch of interesting things there
and we'll go through them but I want to
ask you first Ricky you pointed out that
you two have different political beliefs
like you share some core presumptions
but you have different political beliefs
so how would you characterize both the
similarities and the differences in your
beliefs yeah I'm a I'm a right-leaning
libertarian I don't I don't want to
speak for you in terms of how you define
your politics but I'm I'm left of center
homeless Democrat um but definitely and
when it comes to and that may sound in
like highly inconsistent to a lot of
people these days but there was nothing
inconsistent for for someone my age to
be really pro- free speech and also
think of themselves as as a left of
center um unfortunately there are fewer
and fewer of us when I when I look at
what was going on in the 90s you know I
always thought kind of like the more
working class element of the left would
W would win over I and I thought the
people who believed in speech codes and
you know some of the identity politics
stuff were just our crazies who would
eventually self- marginalize I'm really
disappointed to see that they seem to
have all the juice on the left at the
moment yeah and it seems like at least
in my lifetime the word liberal was
associated with very illiberal actions
and and things in a way that you know
true Classical liberalism is not a
partisan divide in my mind and I think
that that's really where we share our
our common values and um and certainly
in in terms of free speech and cancel
culture that's like the heart and center
of our book and we pull no punches you
know when we think the right or left has
been wrong just like we do is fire we
call them out but when it comes to the
um but when it comes to the phenomenon
cancel culture the place where it's the
most dominant of course is in higher ed
and that is a very you know um
disproportionately Lefty space and we
got and uh it and it's gone really off
the rails as you will know in higher ed
Ricky how how in the world did you
become a Right leaning leaning
libertarian I mean as as while Jonathan
Heights data in particular I Craig
worked on this too I mean the data is
indicating quite clearly that there's a
growing divide among young men and young
women in relationship to their political
affiliation with young men increasingly
tilting towards where you stand I would
say right leaning libertarian and young
women increasingly not only becoming
much more miserable on the mental health
front but also becoming much more
leftist so why how is it that you how is
it that you aren't part of that cohort
since you're not why can why do you
think it's reasonable in some sense for
you to speak for younger women younger
people people younger women and uh why
did you drop out of
University so I'm actually 23 but my
father is 86 and having that breadth of
historical knowledge in my household and
so near I think made me a little bit
more resistant to generational Trends um
and you know the tides and just kind of
Shifting away from from what I think
common sense right and left was which
happened and I think a lot of my my
parents or my my friends's parents were
a little bit more lenient towards the
nonsense of what my generation would
bring home whereas you know I'd come
home to my dad sometimes at dinner and
and come home with whatever the next
politically correct ism is and and say
oh no Dad we don't say African-American
anymore we say black and my dad would be
like what we we changed that rule like
four times and what's what I actually my
intent is what matters more than the
impact and I think that those sort of
formative lessons definitely um grounded
me in a different time in space um and I
would say you know despite that the the
coddling was talking about mental health
and and a lot of the cognitive
distortions and even though my political
orientation is different I did grow up
on the internet I did grow up on on
Tumblr I have a bunch of friends I saw
firsthand just how ugly and and how
horrific the Mental Health crisis has
been for my generation my freshman
you're at NYU I remember like one of the
first nights that we were in my dorm um
we were all sitting around about six
girls and every single girl was
comparing her self harm scars I was the
only one that didn't have scars and I
just remember in that moment being like
wow there's something so wrong with this
generation and and I'm here firsthand
watching it on the ground I feel in some
ways a part of it one foot in and one
foot out at the same time but certainly
I mean it's it's hard to ignore even if
your politics are different you're
you're myed in it and it's it's so
pervasive um and then lastly my decision
to drop out of um NYU actually and also
I got into Columbia recently and I don't
expect to be doing that as well I I
don't I don't want to finish my
undergraduate degree frankly because
I've had I had two great years at NYU
but unfortunately this stifling
environment was just so beyond something
that I could handle for myself and I
also think you know I I mean I had a 4.0
I was succeeding I was headed to law
school I was I was on the right track
but I found something that I was
passionate about and I realized that I'd
been kind of Hoodwinked by A system that
was telling me that I needed to Fork
over enormous amounts of money and spend
time fulfilling requirements that
weren't important to me and writing
essays that you know defied my own
personal opinions because of the obvious
Slants of my professors and so at a at a
certain point I realized there are more
than one Pathway to success and and I'm
going to tread my own and fortunately
people like Greg were there to kind of
pick me up and and make sure that um I
ended up on the right track and so this
is a way cooler place to be at 23 than
to have just
graduated so Greg I wanted
to commend you for something first um
you're not a psychologist but but you
are the most outspoken psychologist that
I know of pointing out the fact that if
we had set up a cognitive behavioral
therapy program Nationwide to demoralize
young people we couldn't possibly have
done it more effectively speaking
strictly from a clinical perspective
than we have done yeah every
psychologist there is who's worth his or
her salt knows that you don't hyper
protot people because you make them
dependent you don't inundate them with
idiot trigger warnings you don't try to
infantilize them you gradually expose
themel expose them voluntarily to
situations and people and ideas that
they're leery of and by doing so you
fortify them in terms of their own
self-concept and their ability to deal
with the world and there isn't anything
there's nothing that therapists who are
real know more thoroughly than that if
you don't know that you're not a
therapist you're a bloody fraud and
despite
that there there is an absolute Dar of
psychologists speaking out against say
cancel culture trigger warnings all of
this infantilizing idiocy that
characterizes the campuses now that's
partly because as I found out in Canada
that if you do speak out and this
obviously speaks to councel culture the
probability that the midlevel miserable
resentful bureaucrats who are in charge
of doing things like handing out
professional licenses will come after
you and if you can't afford to have your
career threatened well then you're in
trouble now I don't think that excuses
people precisely because I think there's
a time and a place to speak in some ways
regardless of personal cost but and the
thing is you've spoke so obviously it
can be done now I want to talk to you
both you guys about some Psych olical
ideas that I've been working on and some
of them are quite contentious and I'd
really white like to know what you think
so first of all there is a very large
literature on female antisocial
Behavior now it's not as extensive as
male antisocial Behavior literature
because males who are antisocial tend to
be violent physically and that gets more
attention but there are antisocial
females and they have a very set way of
going going about destroying their
opponents to their own advantage and the
way they do that is by innuendo
reputation savaging and
gossiping and this literature all arose
before the dawn of social media and it
was very EST well established for
multiple decades now my observation is
that that scales brilliantly on social
media right because you can Savage
reputations you can use inuendo you can
gossip you can destroy destroy with zero
cost to yourself now women tend to turn
to that because they they don't engage
in physical fighting not between each
other very very rarely and they
certainly can't fight physically with
men so if they're going to be antisocial
and instrumental narcissistic
Psychopathic and all of that they're
going to do it in this more subtle
manner now I see absolutely no limits to
the expression of that sort of behavior
whatsoever on social media in fact quite
the contrary that leads to a even more
dismal possibility this terrifies me to
tell you the truth so you know the the
problem
of
parasitical criminality parasitism in
particular is so deep that sex itself
evolved as a as a solution to the
problem
so the problem of parasitism is very
very
old
and this proclivity of the psychopathic
and narcissistic types to denigrate and
to elevate their reputation falsely is a
form of parasitism and it has no
constraints whatsoever on social media
we know that the troll types and online
Criminal types are much more likely to
have dark tetrad personality
characteristics Machiavellian
narcissistic Psychopathic and sadistic
because the other three weren't enough
my sense is is that we've enabled we've
enabled the Psychopaths they have free
reign to express themselves in this more
feminine antisocial Manner and we risk
bringing down the whole house of cards
because of it so the first thing I'd
like to know is like what do you guys
think about that hypothesis this
disparity in the virtual versus the real
world well uh first thing is that we
took this you know head-on and codling
of the American mind we we said we
didn't apologize for the research and we
made the point that when it comes to the
different ways that males and females um
exercise aggression particularly when
they're uh teenagers but also throughout
their lives that men is much more
physical you know like i' I've been in a
lot of fights in my life I've been a
bouncer I I I i' I've I've seen that but
I also grew up in a house that was
dominated by women and that female
aggression tends to be um relational
that that definitely all these
mechanisms that are much more relying on
you know verbal Tendencies um and and
ways of battling things out verb you
know are well established and I I don't
think it's any coincidence and this is a
very sad fact um but it comes out very
it's very clear in the polling is that
in general and of course this is you
know this talking about um you know
polling um women are are more skeptical
of uh of freedom of speech that than men
are so when you look on campuses um the
polling for women's attitudes this is
actually a very funny um uh statistic
that we found that the schools that tend
Ed to have the highest level of students
saying um that violence is acceptable in
response to speech or that shout Downs
are acceptable in response to speech or
that um uh or that blocking doors are
responsible are acceptable speech or
either women's colleges or former
women's colleges um so that's that's a
distressing you know and that's one of
the reason why we have to we want to
reach more women because we know that
there are plenty of women including Rick
Ricky and naen straon who who works for
fire you know who are who are great
civil Libertarians and we need we need
to recruit from that because as
universities become uh more
feminized it could be a bad an even
worsening situation for freedom of
speech unless we actually you you know
really bring that argument to more women
but anyway yeah and I would I would add
to that point that I think especially in
the past couple decades now that attacks
on Free Speech are are tied to emotional
harm and the idea that people need to be
protected and that that their feelings
are hurt I do think that it's just an
honest like truth that that just speaks
to the female proclivities a little bit
more and so in some in some aspects and
I suppose the more antisocial people
that becomes a really militant response
that they they act on when they feel as
though they're they're able to be the
Arbiters of justice and to protect
weaker more vulnerable people um in just
like a pure emotional sense I would say
as
well a few decades ago private citizens
used to be largely that private the
internet has changed this think about
everything you've browsed search for
watched or tweeted now imagine all of
that data being crawled through
collected and aggregated by Third
parties into a permanent public record
your record having your private life
exposed for others to see was once
something only celebrities worried about
but in an era where everyone is online
everyone is a public figure to keep my
data private when I go online I turn to
expressvpn did you know there are
hundreds of data Brokers out there whose
sole business is to buy and sell your
data the worst part is they don't have
to tell you who they're selling it to or
get your consent one of these data
points is your IP address data
Harvesters use your IP to uniquely
identify you and your location but with
expressvpn my connection gets rerouted
through an encrypted server and my IP
address is masked every time I turn
expressvpn on I'm given a random IP
address shared by other expressvpn
customers that makes it more difficult
for third parties to identify me and
harvest my data and the best part is how
easy expressvpn is to use no matter what
device you're on phone laptop or smart
TV all you have to do is tap one button
to get protected so if like me you
believe that your data is your business
secure yourself with the number one
rated VPN on the market visit
expressvpn.com
Jordan that's expressvpn.com Jordan for
three extra months free expressvpn.com
[Music]
Jordan yeah or or they or they pretend
a kind of genuine feminine compassion
and use that as a mask to cover their
actual antisocial motivations right
because the the borderline personality
types and the real psychopaths this is
particularly true on the female side in
relationship say to borderline pathology
they use self-proclaimed stories of
victimization as manipulative techniques
and part of the reason for that is that
if you're really Serpentine in Your
Capacity to manipulate you harness the
person
the persons that the person that you're
manipulating you harness their
compassion right because that's a very
effective way of of hiding from them
your predatory proclivities it's
extremely dangerous and so I have a
question for you a deeper question Ricky
and so this is a horrible question I
don't think anybody's ever raised it so
I am I am I am not convinced that higher
education institutions and maybe
institutions in general why should we be
convinced that they can survive if
females run them and here's I'm not
saying they can't but I'm going to
present the counterargument just for the
sake of getting myself in all sorts of
trouble here's what I see happening I
mean first of
all or what may be
happening childless women infantilize
other people because they don't have an
infant and so female administrators
infantilize their students female
professors infantilize their graduate
students they they use that fundamental
impetus to protect they misuse it
misapply it now that's well documented
proclivity in the clinical literature
the psychoanalysts documented that
starting with Freud that's the devouring
mother fundamentally so and then we have
no historical data suggesting that women
as such can organize large scale social
institutions because as the feminists
themselves have claimed forever they
were either not doing that or excluded
from it forever and it may be naive to
assume that that's just something that
women can do even though that's as I
said there's no
historical there's no historical
precedent for it now I did research in
2016 before I had to stop fold up my
research Enterprise entirely we were
looking at what predicted authoritarian
politically correct beliefs and we did a
very careful job the first thing did was
analyze political beliefs to see if
there were a collection of coherent
beliefs that you could identify as
authoritarian politically correct and
there clearly was so it's not just a
right-wing conspiracy theory that such a
complex of ideas exists and then we
looked at what predicted the proclivity
to believe in those ideas and the first
predictor was low verbal intelligence
and it was a walloping predictor it
predicted politically correct
authoritarianism better than General
cognitive ability predicts grave
so that was quite shocking to us but the
next best predictor was being female and
the next best predictor was having a
feminine temperament and so you know all
that together makes up a pretty damn
brutal story and so you said both of you
said that you know you're very much
hoping to reach out to women um and and
fair enough and obviously there are
women like Ricky who adopt viewpoints
that aren't totalitarian compassionate
let's say but something's very strange
in higher Academia and in our
institutions overall and I think toxic
femininity is a very much underd
discussed phenomenon so well with that
have at it because like anything I said
that you think is wrong boy I'd sure
like to hear it well I definitely can
only really provide anic data to the
survey data that you have but I would
definitely say that in my experience the
people that have been most militant in
circles of higher education have been my
my female uh my fellow students and also
professors as well but I think that you
know regardless of of whether there's a
a on the mean of women is to lean that
way further one way or another like we
can't change that aspect of Nature and
one thing that I do think that we can
change just going into the inevitable
future of more women in these
institutions is making sure two things
first I think from the root of Education
just as young as kindergarten we need to
emphasize rationality and stop like
feeding into kids emotions and just
saying you're always right and you're
totally you're totally valid and you do
you and if you're if you're upset about
this or if you feel harmed by this then
we need to empower you to accept that
reality I think that we like that's what
the cuddling of the American mind talked
about and I think that that really
hijacks women's psyches more and I think
that we need to from the start of
Education emphasize rationality that
emotions are are a valid part of the
human experience but that they should
not lead your your rational Common Sense
kind of mindset so I think that's one
thing and I think the other thing is
also making sure that our our
universities can maintain a balance
that's more healthy than the balance
that we have right now because like I I
think of Richard Reeves and his research
in in boys and men falling behind and so
I think it's a a combination of having
to make sure that we can foster young
men who are able to take up leadership
roles in higher education um I think
that the education system by and large
is is fairly feminized and and it
definitely feeds more into to female
strengths than male strengths especially
um given the fact that girls tend to
develop a couple years earlier than boys
and so I think that that's another thing
that we you know maybe it's as simple as
redshirting boys and making sure that we
have more young men who will end up in
those leadership positions in the end
because having a 6040 uh split which I
think is what the current situation is
in higher education right now is not
healthy I don't think for the future or
for society no one no no one side should
be falling behind so dramatically and so
quickly over the past couple decades so
those would be my two my two things to
point to on that front Okay so let's
talk okay let's talk about that
so so the first question you might ask
is if there is a feminine proclivity to
prioritize emotion why might that be and
I would say there's two reasons one in
one which is nested in the other so
women are higher in trait neuroticism
which makes them more prone to feeling
negative emotion they feel it more
frequently and more powerfully and
that's extraordinarily well documented
phenomena cross-culturally I don't think
any psychologist who knows the
literature would doubt it and it's
butress by the fact that there are sex
differences in different forms of
Psychopathology so men for example are
overrepresented in alcoholism and in
violent antisocial proclivity but women
are radically over represented in
depression and anxiety and that's also
true cross-culturally so women feel
negative emotions more intensely now
then you might ask well why is that and
the answer seems to be well it has
something to do with sexual maturation
because the differences in temperament
aren't there in childhood they appear
with sexual maturation and the reason
for that here's three reasons one is
well women are smaller than men at
physical maturation and so they should
be L they should be more anxiety prone
in a physical conflict and that should
that should co-occur with puberty
because that's when the size and
strength differential kicks in then
women are much more sexually vulnerable
than men because of course they can get
pregnant and they have to bear the cost
of that and then probably more
importantly women have to take primary
responsibility for early stage infant
care and the thing about infants is all
they have is emotion to communicate and
and more importantly possibly their
emotions have to be regarded as 100%
valid and correct right because if
you're a good mother and I saw this with
my wife who by the way is not
particularly agreeable and is very low
in
neuroticism she would respond to her
infant's distress like in a
microsecond and that was extremely
helpful and it is the case that because
human infants are born so helpless so
neous
that they have to be attended to with
great care and they have to be treated
as if their distress is 100% valid now
you got to stop doing that at about 9
months of age and that's a hard
transition for women to make and so I
have this sinking feeling that the
default female ethical
proclivity is to prioritize emotion to
attribute it to to it 100% validity
because that serves infants best and
that that bleeds out into the
relationships that women establish when
they produce large-scale social
institutions now you said and fair
enough you know possibly we could
prioritize rationality over emotionality
and we could start doing that in
kindergarten but I guess the counter
position would be hey you know that's
what we were
doing and then the consequence of having
women flood into these institutions is
that was instantly inverted and so maybe
education can do something about that
and and maybe not so and it's not like
I'm happy about this or even that I
believe it although you know it's it's a
hard argument for me to escape from I'm
certainly not happy about it I think
it's completely bloody dismal but yeah
but unless see Greg you said earlier
something really kicked around in 20
2014 right something shifted and the
biggest shift in the last 20 years is
definitely on the sex balance in
universities like that's the most
stunning transformation so have at Greg
what do you think about all this sure
well when it comes to um whether you
know um feminization of Institutions um
it's a fact it feminization of politics
feminization of Corporations or higher
education and we just have to figure out
ways to make uh to to not give up on
these institutions because they become
feminized now I do have some hope there
partially because uh I you know I'm I
think that men um have been able to
reflect on uh downsides of masculinity
um in including things like excessive
machismo which can be very destructive
um and I've certainly seen that in my
own life and among among my own friends
um that there there there's a there's a
kind of dangerousness and stupidity that
men have as well now as a society gets
more feminized I don't think um it's
going to take forever for for people to
start realizing that a more feminized
Society also has its own unique
downsides and for people to especially
women to push back against some of these
and there certainly are women out there
who are pushing against it I should note
that some of the best Champions against
cancel culture are themselves women Al
Alice Dreer uh Megan D Bridget fsy
there's a long
list who really JK Rowling who have
really really stood up against this so I
think that yeah I I think that by Nature
you know uh different genders and this
is actually of course the fact that
saying this is radioactive I think is
just absolutely ridiculous talking about
that different genders have different
strengths and weaknesses that's a fact
um but we C we have we do have a not bad
track record of learning how to um
recognize uh what were our strengths of
weaknesses and and get past them and and
we're going to have to because it's not
like a higher ed is going to is is going
to suddenly um have good gender balance
like immediately but one of the things
that we really do try to point out in
the book and a major part of the book um
is we talk about different kinds of
rhetorical fortresses um and what we
mean by that are really creative and
some not very creative ways of getting
out of addressing someone's actual
argument and we talk we we first go
through the ones that left and right and
basically all human anity uses which we
call the mindfield and the obstacle
course but then when we get to on the
left we go through through this thing
that we call the perfect rhetorical
Fortress it is just this Exquisite Maze
of dodges uh all over the place of ways
to not have to address your your the
person's argument and we even go through
that what we call the Dem the first one
by the way is labeling someone
conservative um and this worked back
when back when I was in law school I'm
embarrassed to admit and I and I I'm
very embarrassed to admit it worked on
me that essentially if you could label a
writer as yeah that if you could label a
writer as Conservative then suddenly you
took them less seriously um and that
that was something that I I'm
embarrassed to admit um so that's level
one and that's just ridiculous that's
that's the way children are argue but
then we take through the entire
demographic funnel and of course you can
dismiss someone on the basis of gender
on the basis of sex on the basis of uh
race on the basis of Etc and we bring
get you down the demographic funnel to
about 0 4% of the entire population of
the US and then say and by the way none
of it actually mattered because if you
have the wrong opinion like JK rling or
for that matter
um uh black conservatives you're still
discounted anyway um and and one thing
that really kind of gave truth to the
lies I talked to every black
conservative writer and black moderate
um that I know all of them said they've
been told they're not really black um
for having the having the wrong opinion
so it's really more of a Dogma
protection uh system so I do think that
there is hope that if if we basically
can get even if we can just establish uh
get back to rules we all know are better
for finding truth um and get away from
from this ridiculous way of arguing that
literally has no uh help hope of getting
you towards the truth and actually waste
time to just get to whatever your
opinion is that if you can focus on
constructive ways of arguing there is
still some hope I would also add that I
see some hope in in alternative
educational methods that are popping up
especially postco and you know I think
part of the problem is the education
schools are so politicized in America
and so feminized and um and also at the
same time you have the vast majority of
teachers especially at younger grades
who are women but I think so ideological
too education absolutely and and I think
that and it and it tap those schools tap
into those those instincts and those
those um negative feminine instincts
that you're talking about Dr Peterson
and I think that especially postco now
that we're looking at different models
and and different um educational forms
and different ways that parents can be
involved or or positive male role models
can be involved in in education uh from
the start I think that that has the
Upstream effect hopefully of of
counterbalancing some of the the
excesses that we see in our universities
today I honestly think that mechanisms
that that allow people to completely
sidestep higher education is actually in
some cases our best hope for making
higher education better because right
now you know you go to Harvard you know
um you who knows if you're it's a good
guess that you're probably pretty smart
and work pretty hard in high school but
not necessarily um you you you could
also be like the kid of a major donor or
let in on an athletic scholarship um and
the average grade uh GPA now at Harvard
is 3.8 which which is which is like an A
plus so right now we have at least an
opportunity that schools the really
prestigious Elite schools are no longer
very good markers of who are going to be
your best hires or who are going to be
your best employees because you might
they might be smart they might not be
you can't really tell if they learned
anything because they all get 3.8s um
and they also are likely to come with
them a very um difficult to work with
kind of idea of you know my my workplace
is oppressive meanwhile if there are
ways for the for for hardworking smart
kids to be able to show that they are
conscientious that they're able to re
they're able to read at a at a high
level that they're that and that they
are the hardest working and and best and
brightest that can be done actually
really inexpensively um and if we start
actually looking at some of these
alternative uh ways of of educating
yourself it could it will scare Elite
colleges like crazy and I mean and I
tried to practice what I preach here
because originally like we had a policy
um and I didn't realize this that we
have a policy that we wouldn't uh hire
non-degree holders um when I re when
this was pointed out to me when we're
considering hiring Ricky I'm like oh my
God I'm not I'm not practicing what I
preach here we have to get rid of this
policy um and I think more places should
because there's going to be a lot of
really super smart people who are smart
enough to see that they should opt out
of the of higher ed as it currently
exists and and try to figure out to show
that they're the best brightest hardest
working in different ways we're going to
launch a new University in November
called Peterson Academy and I've spent a
lot of time
researching objective assessment methods
for General cognitive ability and for
conscientiousness and the universities
have left that all on the table and it's
of unbelievable economic worth and my
sense is is that a system that would
actually provide a genuine assessment
and accreditation of people based on
their intellectual Merit and their
ability to work hard would be of e
incalculable economic value and could
supplant the universities very rapidly
that is what should happen I had no idea
you're working on that by the way just
completely we got 30 great professors
already up we think we can knock the
price of a degree equivalent down to
$4,000 so which I think would be
absolutely hilarious yeah so Rick Ricky
I should point out here you know I I
went after women pretty hard and I think
rightly so in some ways but I I want to
point some things out that I know too
just so just so you know and everybody
listening knows where I stand the data
on ability with regards to men and women
is pretty damn clear men and women have
virtually identical levels of General
cognitive ability there might be some
additional variability in men although
that's disputable but fundamentally half
the intellectual capital in the world is
in the hands of women and we'd be
absolutely fools not to make full use of
that right and we know too that
countries that have a better record of
uh of rights for women and also
providing better access to women on the
educational front they do way better
economically it's it's not even close
and so it's obviously the case that it
would be to the benefit of everyone if
we could harness the full potential
Talent of people regardless of sex you
know the old liberal dream um that
doesn't
solve the problem of the fact that we're
corrupting our institutions at a rate
that's absolutely beyond comprehension
but it does mean that you know we're not
going to put the genie in the back back
in the bottle and neither should we if
we can as we have if we can free up
women so that they can have their
families and their relationships just
like men and they can produce and and
explore and create in relative Freedom
obviously that would be better for
everyone I just wanted to make that
clear I want to put one more pessimistic
observation that you guys can comment on
and then maybe we'll turn to fire for a
minute and your recent rankings of
freedom on free on campus well so we
have this potential problem of the
feminization of the institutions and and
the rise of politically correct
authoritarian Doctrine and the cancel
culture that's emerged out of that we've
talked a little bit about that I guess I
think May maybe maybe we're in a perfect
storm because if it's true that
antisocial female behavior in particular
scales extremely well on social media
maybe what we're seeing is this weird
unexpected interaction where we have you
know the emergence of female dominated
institutions at exactly the same time we
have this immense technological capacity
that we never had before that enables
the worst of feminine like Behavior to
make itself fully manest in the public
sphere now I know that lots of trolls
online by the way are men and perhaps
even the majority of them but but that
that's not precisely the point the point
is that it's reputation savaging
gossiping and innuendo that the net does
particularly well and that puts us all
in a well it exacerbates it might be
exaggerating
substantially the the detrimental
effects that we're also seeing as a
consequence of the rapid sex
transformation in our institutions so
Greg I don't know if you have any
thoughts about that if what you think
about that as a potential
observation um I think
that when you pointed to the the sex
difference being the major change that
we saw in 2014 and I know it's almost
become a cliche I really do think that
the big change that that allowed for
cancel culture more than anything else
is a massive technological shift and
when I was in the law school I did six
credits on censorship during the tutor
Dynasty um and because I'm a First
Amendment nerd and our our uh theory of
prior restraint in the United States and
First Amendment law comes actually out
of the old print licensing scheme in
tutor in Stuart England um and I I
actually studied a lot of of of the
first person who to licensed printers in
um uh in England which was Henry VII and
you can see from 1521 to 1538 this
desire to uh put the genie back in the
bottle as you say um but the the simple
fact is that when you introduce a huge
number of additional people to a global
conversation it is
unavoidable that you'll enter an
anarchical period you're going to enter
a a a crazy period because yes printing
press long-term great benefits to it
shortterm increase in The Witch Trials
um absolutely crazy bloody wars of
religion um that it led to some
short-term really horrific results and
what we've just just done particularly
with the rise of social media is we've
done something and people really have to
appreciate like how what the scale of
this we just made it possible due to
largely social media and the internet
over an incredibly short period of time
introduce billions of additional eyes um
and and mouths to to a discussion and
when you have that much that many
critical eyes on a problem you can tear
down any person and that's cancel
culture any idea or any institution um
but I think that the pessimism that we
have right now is part partially because
and I and I you know my my co-author
John height and so many other people are
trying to figure out ways to put the
social media Genie back in the bottle
and I'm the one telling them like I've
got bad news for you there is no way to
avoid this being a crazy period however
cultures adapt people people learn um
people do actually learn new cultural
ways of adapting to a major
technological shifts and over a period
of time it actually turned out that
those extra million eyes that the
printing press brought on to problems
were incredibly good at actually getting
towards truth because you had Mass
disconfirmation you had people you had
that many more people reading something
could actually point out falsity much
faster and that's the way you get to
truth Mo mostly is just by chipping away
at falsity um and I feel like there is I
I have not stopped being at least to
some degree a techno Optimist because I
think once you have an extra billion
eyes on on a problem you can actually
solve some problems um much more
thoroughly and much more quickly if
you're not using it just to gossip just
to cancel people just to if if you use
it to argue towards truth and that's
something that we really emphasize in
the book it's like listen social media
as it currently exists there could be a
better way and I know that there're all
small companies trying to actually
figure out ways to argue toward uh argue
towards truth so so the short-term
pessimism that we all feel it doesn't
have to be this way forever and I think
that when when you alluded to the idea
that there are some reasons to be wildly
optimistic as well you know like I think
we're both there talking about uh
potential technological advant advances
it really could you know save save the
species so to speak um so I do I do
think that long term a lot of the
problems that we're seeing right now are
the early problems created by something
that will ultimately prove to be a
positive
shift yeah well your your well your
comments about what happened after the
printing press was enabled are very
interesting I mean so what's essentially
happening according to your uh analysis
is
that the territory of public discourse
has expanded extremely rapidly twice in
the last 500 years once with the
introduction of the printing press and
now once with the introduction really
well of a variety of modes of
communication that were not there before
including long-term video and audio and
the permanence of those and and then the
fact that people commun can communicate
with the pen stroke with millions of
people so we've expanded the polity of
free speech dramatically now you could
make the case and I think this is what
you're doing that there's going to be a
lag before the institutions catch up
right and those would be the cultural
norm institutions but also the rules and
regulations the laws it's the wild west
and what that means is in the wild west
while the Psychopaths have an
opportunity to flourish at least
temporarily till everybody figures out
how to get the back under
control yeah the problem I see that's
fair enough and you could well be right
the problem I see is that
well there's a bunch of problems is that
the way that Psychopaths the
manipulative types are held responsible
is that people eventually learn who they
are right so well first of all if you're
enough of a prick in in face-to-face
contact with people especially among men
you're going to get punched and so that
tends to keep that down as long as
you're in embodied form and a few feet
away from each other and of course that
disappears if you're separated which is
why people are more aggressive when they
yell inside their own cars for example
and it's completely gone well right
exactly it's a very well-known
phenomenon and it completely vanishes
online now the problem is with online
communication is there's no iterability
in it right because you can poke someone
hard and then run away and never just
never see them again so there's no
constraint of iterability which is a big
problem and you can do this anonymously
you know and I've gone after the online
Anonymous trolls and I know the Le
literature uh indicating that online
Anonymous troublemaking trolls tend to
have dark tetrad personality types and
they all at me because I they
think well we have to be anonymous
because you know we're heroic
whistleblowers and otherwise we'll be
cancelled it's like no one of you in
10,000 is a heroic whistleblower and the
rest you are just the sorts of Pricks
who sit in their basement and poke at
things who would immediately get punched
in high school and that's gone and so
and so but I can't see a way like one of
the things I've I've thought through is
the fact that you know the social media
companies could separate the anonymous
types from the people who had actual
verifiable identities but I'm also
afraid of verifiable identity because
that takes us down the whole digital
identity route and that's God man look
what's happened in China that's just
that doesn't look like's happen in
Canada well oh yeah Canada yeah yeah
yeah yeah I know well people in Canada
they say well you keep warning that free
speech is endanger it's like no no guys
I'm War warning you that free speech in
Canada is already gone it's not in
danger it's already gone and you know to
the the degree that that's the case in
places like the US is debatable but I
don't think it's debatable in Canada
it's just that people haven't woken up
to it anyways you are optimistic but
with that optimism I mean what do you
see what do you see okay okay well fair
enough fair enough you know I mean we're
we're in
very very variable times let's say I
mean I'd call myself hopeful okay well
what do you see you you've thought about
this a lot both of you what do you see
that might actually be done
concretely to regulate this proclivity
towards Council culture without also you
know I see what Christopher rufo and
people like him are doing in Florida you
know and I have some real sympathy for
their attempts but I can easily see that
going astray too you know once the
politicians enter The Fray of ideas I
mean how could that go wrong I mean it's
going to go wrong real fast
right real fast real fast yeah
absolutely man because most of these
ideas have to be beat in the realm of
ideas as far as I can tell yeah right so
but so what do you see as concrete steps
that are positive that we could take
moving forward say within the
universities yeah no ABS absolutely and
what what's funny is um you know I end
up you know arguing with with uh rufo
about reforms and step number one and I
believe profoundly in higher education
reform um but step number one of reform
is you have to pass something that
actually is legal is actually not going
to be immedi laughed out of court and so
this is what we warned about some of the
regulations that they were trying in
Florida um because I'm I'm a First
Amendment lawyer and and we looked at
what the stop woke act that disantis you
know came out with them like no no no no
no that's going that will never survive
judicial scrutiny and by the way we are
principal and nonpartisan and will be
one of the ones to sue them but
definitely even if we didn't the ACLU is
going to sue and you're going to lose
and you're going to lose very clearly
and you're going to waste oxygen of the
reform movement you're going to achieve
nothing you're going to give them a new
Boogeyman it will get you nowhere and so
far that's exactly what happened um
meanwhile some of the other reforms that
Dan santis was talking about were were
great ideas um when it came to you know
for example having you know um as part
of orientation debate Series where you
actually have people argue about the uh
most radioactive Topics in the country
that could be amazing talking about free
speech and orientation could be amazing
um I think that uh that reducing the
bureaucracy is something I've been
saying for decades um a lot of the worst
things that are happening for freedom of
speech at first for the first part of my
career they were overwhelmingly coming
from the ranks of Administrators um and
then in 2014 they started coming from
the students as well um now people
sometimes think what I'm saying is it
used to be administrators and now it's
students no it now it's administrators
and students and usually and students
they like so like what happened at
Stanford my myma moer um when they you
know shouted down judge Kyle Duncan you
know that very much seemed to be a
collaboration between some
administrators in the Dei programs and
and and students students themselves to
do to do a shout down there so I think a
deep bureaucratized University will will
have more uh will have more free speech
um it will have more due process uh and
it will have fewer of these uh fewer of
these incidents but I also think we
desperately need the kind of
experimentation that you're doing and
University of Texas at Austin is doing
uh manura University out in San
Francisco like ways that actually can
perform better at much lower costs that
can actually tell you who the best and
brightest and most hardworking are out
there um and and your point about the
laws going horribly wrong that
essentially if you think you can just
get rid of bad ideas on on on campus
through legislation well I've got bad
news for you they're already trying to
do that all across the country they're
just coming at it from the left rather
than the right and I'm very proud that
we were able to find because we've been
looking and Dr Peterson we've been
looking for this for a long time we
wanted to find a a really good read
terrible uh Dei policy to shoot down in
court to make it clear that this is
compelled speech this is against
academic freedom this is utterly
inappropriate for a place that's
supposed to be the marketplace of ideas
and we found that unsurprisingly in
California uh and the California
community college system had a system
that actually requires you what and this
includes whether you're a chemistry
professor English Professor to
incorporate uh um uh what is it called
uh intersectionality um anti-racism uh
you know which is which is kend's kend's
idea um to incorporate all of these
ideological things that a a lot of
people don't even believe are true to
begin with but that you have to actually
um incorporate in your classroom
regardless of what you teach and
regardless of whether or not you
disagree with them or not so we brought
this in court and it's very it's been
very funny to me um watching people who
were totally with us when when we
litigated against the stop woke act
freaking out that we're litigating
against the Dei um tyranny and and
making the point that that and I just
argue back to him like no this is a
gross
violation I always make the point that
telling people what they can't say is
really bad and we will always fight it
telling people what they must say is a
thousand times worse and we will
definitely fight that right
away that's what I objected to in Canada
and that's also why my license is on the
line now is because I am being told what
I have to say which is way different
than what I can't say you know it's a
little bit of both but yeah it's
stunning it's beyond comprehension well
the other thing the other thing we found
by the way in that research I referred
to was that if people had taken even one
course that had a politically correct
orientation they were also much more
likely to be politically correct
authoritarian so this this tactic that
the radicals on the left have of gaining
control of the education system that's
unbelievably effective and Ricky you
mentioned earlier this is something
that's been an absolute bloody mystery
to me I can't believe you know I'm not a
fan of the Democrats in the US for what
that's worth given that I'm Canadian but
um the Republicans and the conservatives
have their problems and some one of
those problems is kind of
shortsightedness is like I cannot
believe and I haven't had anyone explain
this to me except Chris I talked to
Chris Christie about this because he
went to battle with the teachers unions
in New Jersey so you know the faculties
of Education have a monopolistic Hammer
lock on teacher certification right and
there's like absolutely no reason for
that the faculties of Education there to
call their research dismal and
misleading is to barely scrape the
surface they got to stupid several
decades before the rest of the
universities they generally have the
students who perform the worst
academically and so and everything they
teach is ideological and unfounded
there's no evidence whatsoever that the
faculties of Education know anything
whatsoever about making better students
and yet they have a hammer lock on
teacher certification and that
essentially gives the progressive
radicals access to
50% of the state budgets in the US so
it's no bloody wonder that the Liberals
the real liberals and the conservatives
are losing the culture War I mean they
handed the children and we've handed all
the children to the faculties of
Education for the life of me I can't
understand how conservatives can't see
that and I just want to add one thing
that we didn't know when codling of the
American mind came out and we should
have um is that uh we've been calling
out education schools you know since we
were founded at fire and one thing that
we fought successfully by the way um
what was the accreditation body for most
education schools tried to have a social
justice requirement I'm saying that you
could not graduate with a degree in
education unless you proved your
commitment to social justice um which is
is were like uh guys if you don't see
this as as an obvious political litness
test then I don't know what to say so we
got that defeated but of course when you
have a situation where only fire and
some other groups are objecting to an
obvious political litmus test um and
it's considered just fine among other
people in the field then the problem's
already gone way too far one thing we
didn't know though is how much of the
administration at universities come from
education schools and that we we were
way ahead of the curve fighting um at
University of Delaware back in 2007 they
had this absolutely crazy brainwashing
program um that involved you know people
having mandatory meetings with their
raas where they had to confess um to uh
they had to talk about like when they
discovered their sexual identity and
this was in this case like one of the
examples we had was a y a young woman
you know being in a in a session with a
a man's room being asked this and and
her answer was none of your damn
business and she actually got written up
for that we're like that's exactly the
right the right call on that so we we've
been fighting this for a long time but
we didn't actually fully fully
understand how much of the distortions
we see in highered as it currently
exists actually come from the fact that
that the administrators who are
enforcing these rules and enforcing the
speech codes and enforcing the bias
related incident program policies are
actually education school graduates
themselves the Bible is the root of all
wisdom inspiration and spiritual
nourishment the hall app empowers you to
explore the Bible's profound teachings
and to effortlessly incorporate them
into your daily life a great place to
start while you deepen your
understanding of the Bible is to check
out father Mike Schmid's Bible in a year
available on the Hallow app for brief
daily readings and Reflections here you
can dive into an extensive library of
Bible reading plans accompanied by
insightful Reflections and Audi guided
meditations whether you're a seasoned
Bible reader or just starting your
journey hallow provides a platform for
you to engage with scripture like never
before studying the Bible's literary
Brilliance has influenced countless
writers poets and artists throughout
history by studying the Bible yourself
you'll gain a deeper appreciation for
the power of Storytelling symbolism and
metaphor enriching your understanding of
literature across different genres the
Hallow app also helps you connect with a
community of like-minded individuals
sharing experiences insights and
encouragement along the path to
spiritual growth download the app for
free at hall.com Jordan you can set
reminders and track your progress along
the way enrich your education and
nurture your mind and soul today
download the hall app at hall.com Jordan
that's hall.com
Jordan hall.com Jordan for an exclusive
3-month free trial of all 10,000 plus
prayers and
meditations yeah yeah yeah well they're
they're responsible also for the worst
excesses of
so-called psychological research in the
last 60 years it's like the self-esteem
movement that was a complete bloody
catastrophe that was the first time that
the univer or that the schools set out
to actually produce neurotic narcissists
and they did that quite successfully
they pushed whole word learning which
plummeted California from top of the
national standings and literacy to
bottom within about 10 years right
predicated on the idea that just because
expert readers could read a word at a
glance that we should teach children to
do the same even though we have a
Phanatic alphabet which might have been
a hint right the education schools
produced multiple intelligences which
was a complete bloody fraud they
produced practical intelligence social
emotional learning like it's just one
destructive counterproductive
anti-scientific fad after another and
that's in addition to the fact that
while they're woke Beyond Comprehension
incompetent and generally have the worst
students and the lowest academic
standards so the conservatives couldn't
possibly have done a worse job of
defending their own territory if they
would have come up with a plan to do so
so Ricky with with with what you're
doing like my daughter is pretty active
on social media and she has a background
similar to yours I'd say her political
leanings are probably approximately the
same as yours somewhat right leaning
libertarian um what sort
of what sort of cancellation Etc do you
face online like I mean I've read the
comments directed towards my daughter
and I mean the ones directed to me are
pretty brutal but women do face a level
of brutality especially personal attacks
often appearance related that men just
don't face and so what's that been like
for you and how is it has it been a
problem and how how do you defend
yourself against that look at the
expression yeah um yeah I think you know
it I'm I'm benefited by the fact that I
grew up with social media and I was on
this is one of the few upsides of that
fact that I've been on Instagram since I
was 11 unfortunately but I do know how
to deal with um negative comments and
negative feedback just from day one
essentially of being a an adolescent but
I would say yeah when I I did my first
real foray into Mass exposure and and
seeing what you know I I I tend to be
like I kind of roll my eyes at the like
misogyny and ult like a lot of my
feminist friends who are seeing it in
every corner but my god when I did Bill
Mah did I see just like the wrath of God
come for me a way that was not coming
for my co-panelist so that definitely
was a um a a humbling experience I made
the mistake of reading the Reddit
threads and then told myself never again
now I know what's out there I know what
they can come come at me with um but I
would say yeah there was that that
definitely um weirdly all people on the
left I found so far at least when I am
on conservative forums maybe because
they're more friendly to my ideology I'd
get less of that um but certainly a lot
of the more left leaning Bill Mah fans
were um less less fans of mine than than
most of my audience Jordan I I I I
tweeted out um you know about like how
uh like I said at the beginning how
lucky I felt to work with ricking and
we're we're a great team because I'm I'm
a crazy
overwriterz with um and I I mentioned
this on Twitter and of course a lot of
people who think of themselves as
Champion women and and and uh you know
very Progressive on the left immediately
were like oh you're just riding with her
because she's a uh because she's a
skinny blonde who works for Fox and I
was kind of like wow so you're just I'm
I'm writing with her because she's
brilliant and the funny thing is we we'd
never met until probably like we met
after we signed the book deal actually
in person for the first time which is
funny this is a pandemic uh pandemic
meeting of mine so it was kind of funny
like because I I was so impressed with
her and my interactions with her was was
just like email and phone calls when I
first saw her I'm like oh my God you
really are a
kid my response and Dr Peterson if I may
go back to your question about what we
can do to actually solve cancel culture
I do have um you know my my expertise is
certainly less professional but more on
the ground as a young person growing up
in the age of cancel culture for as long
as I can effectively remember and I have
to tell you one thing that I think is
just so underappreciated is the fact
that just courage is contagious and when
I was at NYU I learned I learned the
hard way that cancel culture thrives off
of making everyone feel alone and as
though they're the only person around
them that thinks the way that they do it
incentivizes you to close in on yourself
to not to not share your beliefs and you
know you could be sitting next to a
roommate who feels the same way or
someone across the hall and I was when I
first decided my first article um that
was published was actually in the daily
wire and when I first decided to put my
name to an article I was ready for
everyone I knew to instantaneously hate
me and disown me and some people not
huge fans of what I was writing and
that's fine but I found out that there
were so many people that I was so close
to in so many ways that actually shared
a lot of my political beliefs or at
least the core principles of of
Classical liberalism or or they
respected me in a way that I didn't
expect and even at a place like NYU and
I I actually say this in our book but um
I when I was a freshman I was hiding
books under my bed including your book
12 rolls for life and Thomas Souls books
so I had my like secret Library
underneath my bed which I'm ashamed to
admit looking back but when you're
18-year-old in a new place yeah exactly
but when you're an 18-year-old in a new
place like the incentives are to to
close in on yourself and as soon as I
spoke out I had administrators
professors people that lived on my floor
in my dorm people that I was friends
with for years and
like if we can just prove that this is a
tyranny of the minority which it
absolutely is statistically even with
Gen Z even though our genz politics are
so out of control if you look at what
Generations have a positive view of
cancel culture the most positive view is
Millennials it tapers down as as you get
older but the least positive view by far
is Gen Z because we grew up in it we
know how awful it is to be a teenager
with trip wires all around you and if we
could just get more young people to say
you know what here I am being open and
honest and humble and and criticize my
beliefs but they're they're out here and
this is who I am then the courage will
be contagious I feel very confident in
that well there's something I want to
zero in on that too so you tell me what
your experience was so you said you know
you were hesitant when you first started
to write but um so one of the things
I've
realized more clearly in the last five
or six years is
that the the meaning that sustains you
in life is certainly not a hedonic
meaning and the reason for that at least
in part is that well Hedonism can make
you impulsive and make you sacrifice the
future for the present and it can
alienate you from other people because
if you're hedonistically inclined you'll
use other people but there's a deeper
reason why it's not reliable as a means
of orientation and that is that if
something terrible happens to you
Hedonism isn't going to protect you
because you're not happy when you're
suffering and so if you're relying on a
hedonistic Viewpoint then as soon as
you're miserable you're
doomed so then you might say well what
do you turn to to sustain you and you
can think well you have your
relationships your loves and your
interests and all of that and I think
that that's crucial but there's
something else that sustains you too and
I think this points deeply to what makes
life actually meaningful and that is
that Adventure sustains
you you know and I think were built for
the kind of Glorious Adventures that we
like to go watch on movies maybe a
romantic adventure that's the Pinnacle
of Adventure you know and then you might
ask yourself
well if you wanted to have an adventure
maybe a true romantic
adventure that was even beyond the scope
of your wildest dreams how might you
find that and I would say well you find
that by telling the
truth because if you see if you tell the
truth you have to let go of what you
want right because you don't know what's
going to happen happen when you say what
you think if you're crafting your
message to gain a particular outcome
you're not telling the truth you're
using your words in a manipulative way
now you have experience of this is this
is what I've gleaned from what you've
told me so far is that you know you were
in a relatively woke environment to say
the least and then you decided that you
were going to actually write what you
believe to be true okay what was the
consequence of that for you I mean I
certainly have a few less friendships
but they were not the the ones that were
um meaningful and actually bringing me
towards my my higher purpose in life I
think 100% And I I mean I have to say
looking back as scary as it was to be on
the precipice of deciding do I want this
to Forever you know Google will exist
and that my name was forever in the
record with all my political opinions
and it felt very much like like a noo
back sort of situation and I can I have
absolutely zero regrets at all
whatsoever because as you're saying like
the authenticity is is the most
important thing and I I think that
there's real crisis with young people
who are growing up online even if it's
not their politics even if it's just
feeling like if they say something in
Artful or they make a dumb joke in
they're a teenager that it could be
screenshotted and sent to everyone or
sent to their college or their college
might revoke their admissions like I
think that we've the the way that our
our our teenage fumbles are just so
etched in stone with technology and
social media today I think is really
causing a crisis of authenticity with
young people and we need to wake up that
well you know you
said you started writing and that went
very well you it propelled you out of
University it propelled you into this
career you already have at a very young
age as a columnist it's propelled you
into a fire uh fellowship and now you're
about to become the co-author of a book
that will probably be bestseller and you
know you got rid of some friends you
didn't need because you found out who
they really were and to me that seems
like nothing but benefit now that you
know my observ has being if you do say
what you think there's a short-term
price to be paid which is of course why
people lie to begin with they want to
avoid the price or they want to gain
something they don't deserve so that's
the reason to lie so what's the reason
not to lie well the answer is you get to
have your adventure now you have to pay
the price for it and that might be that
you get raked over the coals a little
bit when you open your mouth but it
looks to me like you know you're on a
pretty good pathway at the moment and
and that wouldn't happened if you
wouldn't have de decided to take the
risk to actually write down what you
believe to be true you know despite your
Youth and your lack of preparation for
doing so right so you have that
psychological authenticity but that's
not all that happened as soon as you did
that a a whole series of doors open to
you and there's no reason to assume at
all that that's going to stop and I
think that happens to everyone if they
actually if they actually abide by and
speak the truth I think that pathway is
open everyone and Jordan a ma a major
theme of the book um and one of the
things we try to explain to people is
sometimes people say oh canc culture is
of course real but it doesn't affect me
I'll never be canceled I'm not an
environment where I'll be canceled and
time and time again of course I hear
this from professors and within like a
year they're they're writing fire to ask
for our help um but even off campus one
of the ways in which cancel culture is
devastating and and we we see this in
the case of like Carol hooven um a
professor at uh at Harvard who stepped
down down from her position um and and
left Harvard for a while um after she
just went on Fox News and argued that
biological sex exists and got targeted
by by administrators there and argued it
so tactfully tactfully compassion
mistake she she's a she's wonderful
person but of course what I feel like
the the these people don't get is as
like you know that you've completely
destroyed any credibility that anybody
will have ever debating these topics
ever again when it comes from Academia
if if people know that one Galileo can
be sacrificed for arguing that this you
know the earth goes around the Sun
they're they're not going to trust
anybody else who says that the Sun goes
around the earth again you know um like
it that that's just the way it works and
from that kind of effect of having the
billion extra eyes on the problem what I
feel like it is it showed us how shallow
our expert class is how shallow our
pundit class is how uh you know it let
let more people know about the
replication crisis and how much shatty
research comes out of higher ed and that
led to sort of like an epistemic anarchy
kind of situation like we currently have
but that's not sustainable and what
happens over time and I think is
happening is people are looking
primarily to individuals who they're
like okay who who has always been honest
to me who has actually always said what
they think is actually true and I think
that one of the reasons why I'm like I
said I'm not necessarily optimistic but
I am hopeful is that and particularly on
places like substack for example you you
you see some of these experts who have
always shown Integrity you know having
creating audiences around themselves to
be the people who raise their hand and
say by the way one thing I can say is
you'll always get the truth from me yeah
yeah like Jay Bacher at Stanford for
example yeah there's lots of examples
like that now and there's more academics
like that coming out of the woodwork all
the time hey so let's talk about Harvard
you brought up Harvard I used to work at
Harvard and I loved it there it was a
great institution when I was there in
the '90s
um you in a fit
comic uh accuracy your organization fire
has just awarded Harvard your coveted
you score below zero on campus freedom
score and which I don't know how you can
score below zero on a scale so I'd like
to hear about that I think you gave them
you actually invented a new category
which was abysmal and abysmal is not
good um can you
explain why is this not just a joke
let's say and can you justify what you
did and let people know what it
means yeah I've been I've been kind of
amused by uh some people that I know at
Harvard um claiming that our survey was
arbitrary because it couldn't possibly
be true that Harvard scored actually
Less Than Zero by by by our um by our
rating now to be clear we have done
every year we've been doing it fire has
conducted and progressively the largest
study of student opinion about the
atmosphere for freedom of speech on
their campus ever um like from the very
from our very first one I believe it was
the largest one that was ever of student
opinion and now we're up to 55,000
students that we talk to we create um we
work with a group called College pulse
we create representative panels at each
school um we survey them on everything
from how acceptable violence is and
response to freedom of speech to whether
or not they feel uh like they can
disagree with each other or whether or
not they're afraid to disagree with
their professors we also have the
largest database of speech codes ever
put together um we we evaluate
universities according to their their
written policies we evaluate them in
terms of cancellation of professors and
attempts to cancel professors we
certainly think that if you have a huge
number of professors who have been
targeted that certainly speaks badly of
the environment to begin with but
certainly if you're firing them to or
punishing them to that that's even worse
and that's a bigger D we have the
biggest database of students be uh being
targeted and we combine all of this
research together in in definitely the
most ambitious attempt to rank schools
according to freedom of speech you know
ever done and I don't put a thumb on the
scale at any of this and Harvard when we
uh never did well on on our survey it
was always in the bottom fifth sometimes
it was in the bottom 10 um last year it
was uh in the bottom fifth um but every
year we try to refine it we try to make
it more and more accurate so we we
figured out rigorous ways to actually
include things like Professor
cancellations and that sort of stuff but
the biggest thing we emphasize are what
students are actually saying about the
environment on campus and the News
wasn't great um interestingly michig
Technological University ended number
one the most elite school that ended uh
in the top 10 was University of Virginia
University of Chicago always does very
well but besides those schools Elite
higher education has done terribly last
year the dead last one was Colombia um
and this year it was Harvard but Harvard
really scored abysmally like it earned
that because for example pen Penn uh uh
University of Pennsylvania in in in in
uh in Philadelphia um has had a really
rough bunch of years I mean they're
targeting Amy wax is just one of the
things that's going on like a tenear
professor that they're trying to get rid
of um but the students themselves are
saying this is an environment where it's
really hard to have a discussion about
anything important um and of course you
know a lot of these schools you end up
them at the same time having you know
being kind of soft on violence and
response to speech which might be part
of the problem um but University of
Pennsylvania which was uh 247 out of the
248 schools that we ranked got a score
of like
11.63 U which is really bad um Harvard
score was negative
10.67 we rounded them up to zero because
we thought that uh because we thought
that was a responsible thing to do but
they actually scored below zero
according to all the different
environments uh that that we rank
including again most importantly what
students are actually saying about the
environment at how can you score how can
you score below zero how do your scales
work I know this is a technical issue
but I'm still curious I mean how how was
that even possible
POS uh we give schools scores for
whether or not they support students
when they're in situations um when
they're when they have their free speech
challenged uh and when they have a a
speaker disinvited and you get you get
negatives for things like dis like if
you have a disinvitation and the school
didn't do anything to stop it you you
you you get negative points and most
schools actually sorry all 247 other
schools were able to we didn't think
there was any risk that that a school
could get an actual negative score um
because we we do we do these little uh
these little adjustments here and there
very you know very rigorously to try to
um accommodate for the fact that one you
know students sometimes go to schools
that they think are actually pretty good
for Free Speech but actually if you look
at the record they're firing tene
professors for freedom of speech so like
Princeton actually scores surprisingly
well um even though they fired tenard or
or they forced out Professor Joshua Catz
now of course they said that was for
sexual misconduct but it's really clear
the reason why why he was targeted was
because of his calling um I think BLM
like a a hate group or something like
that um that that's when the scrutiny
started and that's what they actually
got him out for so they get a ding for
forcing out a tenure Professor but the
the students there are themselves and
this comports you know somewhat with my
own experience I actually think the
environment is not that bad for free
speech Princeton doesn't do great of
course um but in uh so we we we include
all of these factors together and
Harvard you know Harvard's been on our
our 10 worst schools for freedom of
speech list I think four times already
and we've only been doing that since
2011 so nobody it shouldn't have come as
such a shock to Harvard that they need
they need to fix things and meanwhile
you know good good friends like our our
our advisory council member step Pinker
who's been a friend of fire forever he
created a group that was to defend
academic freedom and freedom of speech
at Harvard I think he got a hundred um
Scholars to join it and this is
something that actually creates an
opportunity for them to be taken more
seriously and meanwhile kind of like we
as far as schools that we interact with
fire has a really good track record of
convincing schools to do the right thing
sometimes we have to take them to court
sometimes it's just public pressure that
actually leads them to do the right
thing Harvard won't ever budge on any of
this stuff and the question is like will
the fact that their own students and
that their own behavior has gotten them
that this ranking will this make them
take the issue of academic freedom and
Free Speech more seriously and actually
honestly Jordan you probably know better
than we would yeah well the question is
is har is Harvard a university or a
hedge fund
no I'm dead serious I mean just because
something says it's I'm laughing because
it's true yeah yeah yeah I mean I'm
laughing because it's true like I worked
out that that they had something like
the GDP of Lithuania you know to one
side several years ago and now it's up
to many of the Nordic countries like
they have like $60 billion or something
like that to one side exactly well
that's it and I mean at some point the
the universities a sideshow and we
already might be at that point so that
could easily be the case you know I read
this great book decades ago called
systemantics by a man named John G and
it's a great book very very short um
tongue in cheek in a way but brilliant
and he has a lot of maxims and axioms
it's a list of axioms about how you
analyze how a system works and one of
his axioms which I've never forgotten
and has been unbelievably useful to me
as an analytic researcher was uh the
system does not
do what its name says it does
and so that when you approach a system
you have to look at so if you want to
for example figure out what a system
does you look at where it spends its
money so I learned this when I was
working for the Alberta Government 30
years ago 40 years ago as a junior uh
analyst I had to gather statistics on
how much the social services branch of
the government spent on the actual
people to whom they were delivering
Services right so that would be people
receiving welfare and and uh who are
being subsidized for kindergarten and so
on everything that comes under the
rubric of Social Services and I found
out that the the that there were no
stats the system wasn't set up to
actually monitor its own behavior and
that the consulting company that had
been hired to produce the report
detailing those numbers the year before
it just basically made them up and no
one could tell any different yeah and
then I real there were no stats no no no
nobody had actually looked at how much
was how much the net recipients were
receiving right you couldn't find the
data no no and I'm sure that's still the
case wow oh yes it's beyond belief but
it's no different than most Charities
you know most Charities spend 90% of
their money running the charity now you
know I'm not completely cynical about
that because most corporations have
about a 5% profit margin so that means
they spend 95% of their money running
themselves you know it's not that easy
to get an Enterprise up and running that
actually does something other than take
care of itself but when you look at a a
organization like Harvard and it has
that immense Storehouse of money you
think well why do they care about being
a university what the hell difference
does it make there's $60 billion sitting
there that's got to be the fundamental
preoccupation now that doesn't account
for why it's become so insanely
politically correct you know and I've
talked to Harvard professors one from
the Kennedy School which was
particularly worrisome given its primary
role let's say in determining American
domestic in foreign policy and then one
from a different department who both
told me that one from the business
school told me or the Kennedy School
told me flat out that the professors
there are terrified to say anything they
think because the students will skin
them alive and then same thing from a
Kennedy School person last month yeah
well isn't that wonderful you know when
it when it was the preeminent well it's
just it's just so absolutely appalling
and so yeah well we'll see if Harvard
responds to any of that they might and
they might not it was a great
institution when I worked there you know
I mean I mean the faculty ran the place
the senior faculty that is and the
senior faculty were top rate and the
second people the second most important
people were the
undergraduates and then likely the
junior faculty then The Graduate
students and only then the
administration and the administration
actually ran the
university I'll give you an example so I
had a friend who was a professor there
uh Patrick Kavanaugh
brilliant psychologist in investigating
vision and they invited him in as they
did with senior faculty members with you
know good bonus and and money to set up
their lab and he wanted to shower in his
lab and they said
yes and the reason they said yes was
because they were smart and they thought
well if we have professors and students
who want to stay in their damn lab so
long that they don't go home they sleep
there and they need a shower it's like
okay if you want to work 17 hours a day
hey man we'll build you a shower now you
know at my last institution the
University of Toronto that would have
never happened because they would have
just thought of that as a luxury because
they weren't you know frankly that
bright but Harvard was the sort of place
they I'm dead serious about that they
talked a lot about Excellence but had no
idea whatsoever how to facilitate it
although they were very good at talking
about it and so they put obstacles in
the way rather than clearing them out of
the way and so Harvard was great and I
have no idea what the hell has happened
to it in the interim although you know
the fact that Pinker felt compelled and
he's a very reasonable person and a
liberal by any stretch of the
imagination he's hardly a right-wing you
know some sort of right-wing conspiracy
theorist not Steven Pinker and the fact
that he felt compelled to set up a whole
organization to facilitate free speech
at Harvard is another indication of just
exactly how Dreadful that place has
become alumni should stop giving right
that's part of the solution as well
especially if they're entrepreneurial or
libertarian it's like don't give harv
money what when we talk about this um
like how maddening it is for me to to to
run a nonprofit that we we defend Free
Speech you know off campus as well now
we we just you know relaunched to expand
our mission but we still Focus over
overwhelmingly on higher ed and that's
still that's always going to be you know
Central to what we do and how often I
talk to people who are who um they're
they'll complain and complain and
complain about the schools and that's
and then they'll say it's like I'm even
reconsidering my gift this year and I'm
like you're reconsidering your gift this
year um and and
a lot of times these are these are
gigantic donors yeah well people can't
believe it I mean this is what I'm
seeing in Canada is that yeah Canadians
in my situation I'm being pursued by my
accrediting board at the moment who want
to take my license or subject me to
re-education which is you know just I
just can't even believe that this is the
case and or how they think that's going
to work possibly because I'm definitely
not corrigible by standard re-education
techniques so but I think Canadians when
they look at my situation they have a
very hard choice to make and it's the
same choice that you're requiring people
who are analyzing higher education to
make you had in the United States you
guys had Stellar institutions man those
your Ivy League schools they were
knocking it out of the park for a long
time and the state school system in
California was deadly good for a long
long time and so it's a complete bloody
catastrophe that those institutions have
inverted and and are now actually
pedling hard in the opposite direction
and it's not the least bit surprising
that people can't believe it like I'll
tell you a funny story about this so I
was in the UK a while back okay and I
was talking some of the members of the
House of Lords and they're pretty
elderly people generally speaking and
all of them virtually have had Stellar
careers um
and they had all been forced to take Dei
training and I asked them well what do
you mean forced like like you guys are
actually only responsible to the queen
technically no one can force you to do
anything and they said well they told us
that we would lose our library
privileges we would lose our cafeteria
Privileges and we wouldn't be able to
park if we didn't take the
course really this is actually true and
I thought well why didn't you just tell
them to go to hell and they said well
you know we just thought we we'd had a
couple of scandals on the sexual front
and we thought maybe it wouldn't hurt us
to you know brush up a bit on our
conduct and but they had no idea they
had no idea whatsoever that there is an
entire ideological Enterprise underneath
this pushing everything in this insane
Progressive Direction they had no
concept of that whatsoever and so I
think a lot of people who are looking at
the universities and the political
institutions you know they can either
think
that me and people like me and that
might include you too
unfortunately for you are you know just
noisy conspiracy theorists screeching in
the wilderness or our major institutions
many of which were world class and which
took hundreds of years to instantiate
have now become virtually irreparably
corrupt well it's obviously a lot easier
to write off the bearers of bad news and
sure and unsurprisingly and in Canada
you really see that cuz most of our
institutions here
they worked until well you say 2014
that's probably about right yeah yeah no
it it it it is funny watching the
various ways you get dismissed talking
about this and one of the funniest ones
is when people point out that in my book
on learning Liberty I talked about 2007
as being the worst year I had seen and
that was the one where at the University
of Delaware um you know brainwashing
program that I mentioned before a crazy
case involving someone getting you know
expelled for a flyer um another case in
which someone uh said the the epithet
wet back in class and then criticize to
in order to criticize it and was
immediately suspended all things that
are day-to-day occurrences now and
people are kind of like oh but you're
saying that things have been you've
never seen it as bad but you said that
back in 2007 I'm like because they kept
on getting worse every several years and
you you always have the danger of course
of being dismissed as a as a cook or
unpleasable uh but it's particularly
difficult when you're saying like I've
been doing this for 22 years it was
already worse than I thought it would be
for free speech on campus in 200 one um
and it's definitely had Peaks and
valleys here and there but the trend
line has overwhelmingly been it just
gets worse so 2014 was a was a bad year
2015 was 2017 giant acceleration ints to
get professors canceled and then that's
put in the Dust by 2021 20120 and 2021
and to get to the Dei stuff the idea
that in the midst of a of a situation in
which there are departments that have
literally no conservatives particularly
in Elite higher education where they
have record low all-time low Viewpoint
diversities of viewpoint University
among professors when they have cancel
culture when they have brts when they
have a tenure process that screens out
for loud people when they have all of
these what we call the Conformity
Gauntlet in the book they have all these
mechanisms to shut you up from high
school for actually from K through 12 on
up including nature human behavior
saying that they won't actually publish
things that are found to be harmful to
groups which is just like w survive all
that and still not and and they decided
in addition to this um that they would
add Dei Ms being required for professors
um they needed an additional political L
test it's like I can't believe any like
only an administrator would look at the
world of higher education and see you
know what there is too much freedom of
thought there's too much heterogeneity
among among these professors we need a
mechanism to make it even more rigid you
know I might also add in terms of being
dismissed as a a conspiracy theorist for
for pointing out these realities I think
that the people who I've I've seen to be
be most amenable to um these arguments
that higher education is just completely
turned on its head are young people who
don't remember the model that that you
both remember of it actually being
better at some point in time when you
look at the statistics of faith in
higher education with Gen Z two-thirds
of of current high school students say
that they think that they can tread
their own educational path less than
half of um of current high schoolers say
that a college degree is necessary for
financial success 100% it's a necessity
um and I I mean just the statistics are
staggering and and and who can I mean
like who can blame young people for
looking at the situation in which people
feel like they can't speak their minds
the Millennials are just saddled in debt
we have a system in which H or a third
of American colleges produce graduating
classes in which the median graduate
makes less than the average high school
graduate like the system has absolutely
been been filled with with federally
backed money and student loans the
generation above us is crippled the
insti are dysfunctional and no wonder
young people who then were told oh not
only are you going to Shell over an arm
and a leg to join this University but
now we're going to do the pandemic and
what NYU
did still charge us still charged us
full tuition for Zoom school and that
was when my family was like you have our
blasting you get right out of there yeah
no that was UN that was unbelievable and
like I I real I really feel for you in a
most fundamental way you know when I was
a kid going to school in Alberta now
Alberta was a rich place at that point
you could make quite a bit of money
working in the summer because of the oil
industry essentially at at you know
elevated
salaries I it took me a month's work to
pay my tuition for the year and I could
make it enough in I could make enough in
four months to pay the whole year no
problem you know and I worked part-time
during school and then I would also
say I went to a little College when I
first graduated from high school I only
have had about 700 people Grand Prairie
Regional college and all the professors
there loved to teach and my first year
classes were seminars and I had a blast
it was great and I learned so much I I
basically became literate um I knew my
professors on a first name basis it was
I met all sorts of new people it was
great I was you know trumpeting the
praise of college to everyone far and
wide and it didn't saddle me with any
debt I graduated debt-free essentially
and also with my graduate uh education
because I had a fellowship and so and
lived in Montreal which was also dirt
cheap at the point at the time and so I
was this is no
Nostalgia you know I had an excellent
low cost higher education experience and
I had excellent mentoring in particular
as a graduate student it was high
quality the clinical psychology program
at Migel was like
extremely
effective and you could do research it
was great and then when I went to
Harvard I had a blast the students were
great I loved my colleagues I thought
the university ran like a charm so it's
not just you know old guys looking back
thinking things were better when we were
young it's that things have become so
corrupt and so expensive that it's
actually it borders on what's being done
to young people on the higher education
front borders on criminal the bloody
administrators figured out how to pick
the future pock of the students that's
really what happened and so they just
elevated tuition fees Beyond any
reasonable norm and then to add to that
your observation I couldn't believe the
universities did this it's like well
we're just going to teach you on Zoom
which is way worse than a video lecture
like way worse yeah and we're going to
charge you full
tuition mind not to mention like half
the kids in my classes were in
completely different time zones so
they're up at like 3:00 a.m. and they
all have their cameras off as well it
was just it was an abdication of all of
the school's responsibility on just a
fundamental level at the same time all
of our lives are being torn apart with
these wild cancel culture mobs which we
talked earlier about whether social
media made cancel culture Go arai I mean
certainly when you not only have social
media as the predominant tool of of of
communication going into a pandemic but
then you require that it only be the the
primary sole communication between
people where you no longer have to look
at your classmate in the eye and stuff
like the the conversations that I saw on
on social media even in Zoom chats
during lectures like just absolutely
rampant out of control antisocial
behavior and I think before the pandemic
we were all kind of complacent for a
while and thinking that you know cancel
culture slowed down after 2016 and
people often are are very early to
Champion that it's over and ended but
then we have one little cultural we have
a cultural Hiccup and then we're right
back to square zero and we're burning
the whole the whole house down and
carrying people down with it so I think
you know 2020 in terms of just the
experience of being a young person was
really um life-changing for for all of
us it wasn't great for the olds either
yeah yeah yeah well hence hence your
center right libertarianism so let me
let me come back and maybe we'll close
with this uh let me come back to one
thing you mentioned earlier and this
touches on the work that uh Jonathan and
Greg have done and that Jonathan is
pursuing I imagine you guys delve into
in your new book too which by the way
for everyone listening is coming out
October 17th tell me the title
again the caning of the American mind oh
did you rehears that that that that
that yeah that was real good that was
real good Counseling of the American
mind yeah you mentioned in your you know
the first discussion that you had when
you went off to University that all the
girls that you were sitting around had a
history of self harm you know and
Jonathan has done a very good job
Jonathan height has done a very good job
of documenting this cataclysmic rise in
self-destructive neuroticism hey here's
something that's useful to know so you
know in the neop personality
questionnaire that it's the gold
standard for assessing uh the five
dimensions of
personality so you know one of the
subfacets one of the subfacets of
neuroticism so that's the proclivity to
experience negative emotion literally
one of the subfacets is self
Consciousness there's also a very large
body of work now that documents the
propensity of people who are either
depressed or psychotic so seriously
mentally disordered in the miserable in
the on in the miserable direction are
much more likely to use pronouns and
terms that are self-referential so they
say I and me far more and so it's
literally the truth that the more you
concentrate on yourself the more
miserable you are and of course your
generation has been taught to to I
identify to put their own subjective
self-identification Paramount to do
little else but concentrate on their own
feeling and to do little else but to
concentrate on their own feelings now in
your personal experience you you
mentioned what happened to you in that
first group at University what what do
you feel has been the consequence of
this what do you see happening around
you in terms of the the ongoing conse
quences of growing up in social media
and this depressive well in particular
well let's say for women in particular
also for the relationship between young
women and young man I mean I I have to
say that it feels as though a lot of my
cohort is experiencing kind of like a a
prolonged adolescence I don't know if
that's uh of in part because of the
pandemic and and our adulthoods launched
uh in just such a bizarre way but I mean
I would I would say it's just even still
now when I was a teenager I thought you
know when we get older we're not going
to be mired in the same sort of like
depressive malaise I I it's the only
word I can really use to describe how I
feel like my generation is just like
there's this Cloud over us and and it's
it's often very negative to be in groups
particularly of young women together I
mean it's I I remember that night still
it was just heartbreaking to me it was
UN unbelievable to me that like it was
almost like why was I the one person who
in this group was not able to share in
that experience I mean it's just it's so
common it's so pervasive and even as
we've gotten older I've not seen it
subside I mean I don't I don't have
friends that are still cutting
themselves like they did when they were
teenagers but there's still this this
depressive um like downward poll of my
generation I I think it's harming our
interpersonal relationships I see my
especially my female friends I think
that we are um certainly more more
likely to to indulge in like social
contagions and when they sit around
together it just gets even more
miserable um I mean I completely agree
with with what you're referencing with
the the gender relationships I think
that that's completely ay um I I I mean
I feel like we're we're growing up in a
in an age where you know the the
relationship between male and female is
is quite recently changed very
dramatically and we're still trying to
get our footing on that the way that we
communicate with each other is
completely upended because we're now
completely digitized the political
environment around us is so
dysfunctional and it's just like I I
don't really know what to say about the
state of my generation besides it's just
it's just Bleak and I'm concerned that
it doesn't seem to be getting much
better and somehow we just all seem to
be folding in on ourselves no you know
one of the things I've observed
traveling all over the world now for
five years is that you know if you try
to demoralize young people for 60 years
by telling them that their Ambitions are
pathological and World destroying and
that everything's predicated on Power
and oppression you you actually do
demoralize them especially when you add
to that the vision of a necessary apoc
necessarily apocalyptic future brought
on by that ambition that can only be
rectified by having everyone especially
the poor give up pretty much everything
they own it's like well we're pretty
much done also self-hatred by the way
massive amounts of despising yourself
just Justified self-hatred as a as a as
a parasite on the on the surface of the
planet yeah I think we've pretty much
had enough of that and we do to end on a
positive note you know I mean your
situation is instructive you know you
took these technological tools that are
at your disposal and you're doing that
right now and you decided to say what
you had to say and you know your future
as far as I can tell from the limited
time we spent together your future seems
to be pretty damn bright and there's no
reason that can't be the case for
everyone and so it is a very sad
situation that we've managed to
demoralize young people so badly and to
split them apart at the level of sexual
relationship and that's a real
catastrophe but by the same token and
you you'd mentioned this earlier there
is a an increasing space for people who
are willing to stand up and to make
their case known to do that extra with
extraordinarily Effectiveness using the
tools that are at hand and so maybe that
and you know I think fire is one of the
organizations that's actually pushing
for that outcome to be the one that is
going to Prevail I hope your book also
Tils things in that direction as your
previous book did quite successfully I
mean it's had a good run and people
still talk about it still sells and so
and it did draw a lot of attention to
what was going on in universities I know
that Jonathan height has got a new book
coming out I don't know it's it's well
it's got to be in March right and you're
right right so there'll be about a
six-month Gap e yep yeah yeah well so
October 17th tell us the name of the
title again see if you can do it in
unison I'll give it to you that was
creepy the first time the cancelling of
the American mind yeah well that would
be a catastrophe for the World by the
way I mean one of the things you bloody
Americans have managed with
immense what would you say Panache and
to the benefit of everyone is you
managed to create a culture where for a
long
time you aimed at success and you by in
large you admired it we're not jealous
of it that's a very very very very
difficult thing to pull off and if it
doesn't happen then no one gets to be
successful and when no one gets to be
successful then everyone gets to be
miserable and that's the situation that
we increasingly find oursel in we don't
want that to Prevail so I hope we don't
cancel the American mind I hope your
book is one of the things that helps
everyone wake up to the fact that that
might happen I hope your generation gets
a revitalizing vision and good luck with
your book October 17th very ni nice to
talk to both of you thank you Dr be
thank you so much yeah my pleasure and
to everyone watching and listening thank
you for your time and attention it's
always appreciated I hope you found this
discussion useful and engaging and
interesting and educational you know all
the things that universities used to
offer and so and this can offer now um
thank you to the film crew here in
Florence and uh I'm going to talk
continue this conversation for another
half an hour on the daily wi plus side
so if you want to join us there please
you're more than welcome to do so
[Music]
bye-bye